---
date: 2024-01-07
tags:
  - coding
  - presentation
  - goals
modified: 2024-09-03T20:51:04+02:00
---

Hello everyone,

I'm Simone D'Angelo, and I graduated in Electronic Engineering back in 2021. After that, I did an internship as a Data Scientist (whatever that means these days) at a consulting company from June 2022 to December 2022. Later, I moved on to another company where I'm currently still working, as a consultant in the Tech and Data field, specifically as a Data Engineer.

My big goal is to become a **Software Engineer**, with a focus on being a **Data Engineer**. I think that, in my personal case, the stuff you learn at work isn't always enough to reach your goals, so I believe in doing some extra studying in my free time. That's why I'm starting this blog – to keep track of my learning and work journey, making sure I'm on the right track.

I'm still figuring out exactly what I'll be doing on the blog, but there are a couple of things I know for sure:
- I'll regularly update a table with the courses I'm taking.
- I'll write reports every couple of months, looking back at what went well and what I need to improve.
- I also intend to make notes on the study topics public. However, since I am currently enrolled in paid courses, I am uncertain about the feasibility of sharing notes out of respect for the authors and potential legal restrictions. I will explore ways to address this concern.

Right now, in January 2024, I'm diving into courses about Scala programming language and Spark Framework for big data analysis. I'll give you more details about these courses in my next posts.

I'll update this intro post as soon as I figure out the details. Overall, I'm sharing all this info to stay focused, remind myself not to slack off, and highlight that becoming a good software engineer takes a lot of learning. Being transparent about my goals, mistakes, and progress is my way of staying accountable.

Lastly but most importantly, if I ever share work experiences, suggest study materials, or make my notes public, please please please and plase note that it's not intended as a teaching or tutorial. I want to emphasize that my goal is solely to **be publicly accountable**, and I neither have the right nor the capacity to teach anyone based on my limited experience.