---
date: 2024-05-11
modified: 2024-06-18T21:27:48+02:00
---

As I have mentioned in other posts on this blog, my main goal here is to document my newly started professional career in the of software/data engineering field. Within this journey, I believe in doing some extra studying in my free time and this is what I have done so far with all the posts I published in this blog.

Since I started doing these publications, I have noticed how hard it is to stick to your “learning-plan” set weeks or months ago. It's not because I don't want to, but simply because the more you learn, the more you realize there's so much more to learn, and what you thought was important before might not be anymore, or at least not as high a priority as you thought.

Let me give you an example:  when I started this blog four months ago, I set “Learning Scala” as one of my primary goals. Even though I finished the course about Scala I was following, I have never used Scala in any project (well, except for some code in the Spark posts), so I can’t really say “I know Scala”. Why haven't I used it maybe by doing some personal projects? Because over these four months, I've realized that maybe there are other things I should learn first if I want to be a Data Engineer. And that’s what I did and what I’m currently doing: fine-tuning my priorities as soon as I recognize new priorities.

That's why I want to share with you my personal Notion Page where I keep track of what I'm studying, what's on my learning plan, and what I think should come first. I want to use a Notion Page because, as I said so far, this list could change over time, so you can see eventual updates in real time.

This is the link ([Personal Notion Page](https://www.notion.so/Learning-Progess-70ce133aa98b4d33945a512f89c1ccc2?pvs=21)), but let me spend a few words about what currently is in my Learning plan. As you may see, many of these resources are about Apache Spark. 

The page is divided into three different tables:

- **Video Courses / YouTube playlist**: In this section, I collected all the video courses I've taken, am currently taking, or plan to take. Some of them are free (from YouTube), while others are paid course coming from various platforms. I've also made notes for many of these courses, which I'll be sharing over time.
- **Books**: This section lists all the books I've used, am currently using, or plan to use to delve deeper into certain topics. Unlike the Video Courses / YouTube Playlist, my goal isn't necessarily to read these books cover to cover, but rather to extract the information I need to clarify specific topics.
- **Blog Articles**: Here, I've compiled articles that I find useful to read and know about. These articles serve as additional resources to complement my learning journey.