---
date: 2024-08-07
modified: 2024-08-07T20:43:20+02:00
---
# How did I do with my goals?
It’s Aug 5th right now. The old feeling of not having done enough and wasting some time has returned. However, I have to admit that partially it's only a feeling. I have uploaded on this blog  notes about some chapters of books I started reading two months ago (I mentioned these books in the [previous periodical retrospective](Periodical%20Retrospective/02.Apr-May%202024.md)). I am very happy that I am continuing to study and the interest has not reduced. It's summer, it's really hot and, partially because of this, I recognize that I reduced the effort and the pace. From September on, I have to go back on the old pace.

# Work: B-
I have worked exclusively on the new project, the one that involves code industrialization. When I was included in the project, the code was already at a really good point, but in these two months I had the opportunity to read the amazing code written by my collegue (with the intention of leaning some design pattern and best practices in general, even though I recognize that only-reading is not a good way to learn) and to do add some new steps and do some fix. At the same time, I'm trying to study (and make notes) *Fluent Python* and *Python Object-Oriented Porgramming* books (again, look at the [previous periodical retrospective](Periodical%20Retrospective/02.Apr-May%202024.md) to understand what I am talking about) in order to "formalize" concepts that I'm absorbing from the code. I gave a B- because my collegue's code is so good that I struggle to understand how I can learn to code so well. There are classes and functions that would never have occurred to me to create if I had not seen them here.

# Work-life balance: B
As I anticipated before, I reduced the effort and the pace due to this unbreathable summer air that is draining my energy. So, it's going better compared to the last periodical retrospective.

# Personal studies: B+
This is probably a convinction, but I am never really satisfied about my effort in studying, even when I say I am because I always think that I could have done more. Maybe it's partially true, but life is not exclusively studying and work, so perhaps I am too hard on myself. But how can I not be when I think that there are guys with my age who are already senior software engineers, writing super complicated articles and demonstrating great knowledge?

Anyway, coming back to my personal studies, in these two months I have uploaded on the blog new notes, so keep going and don't despair too much. Furthermore, since I need to take the ## [Databricks Certified Data Engineer Associate](https://www.databricks.com/learn/certification/data-engineer-associate), I got a course on Udemy about that so I am learning new things especially on Databricks and Delta Lake (obviously). I want to take this opportunity to start the book [Deciphering Data Architecture by James Serra](https://www.amazon.com/Deciphering-Data-Architectures-Warehouse-Lakehouse/dp/1098150767) because I have never had the opportunity to understand what Data Warehouse, Data Lake, Data Lakehouse (and related topic like Delta Lake) really are and this is the opportunity to do that.
