---
date: 2024-10-21
modified: 2024-10-26T13:43:30+02:00
---

# How did I do with my goals?
It’s October 21st, and I am a little late in creating this report. Summer was a little bit bad because I reduced my studying effort, but now it’s over, and I have increased the pace and the effort again.

# Work: B
Not much has changed compared to the last periodical retrospective. I am still working on the same project and am happy about that. Now I can understand the code much better and I also did some heavy modifications in these two months with good results. It means a lot to me because both my senior colleague and the client are happy and satisfied with what I did. Of course my senior colleague helped and helps me a lot, especially in designing the high-level solutions, which is the most difficult part.

# Work-life balance: A-
Nothing special to report here. The old days when I couldn't even go to the gym after work are over, at least for now.

# Personal studies: B+
In the last periodical retrospective I said I would like to start the book Deciphering Data Architecture by James Serra, but I didn’t. I preferred to stay focused on Python studies, so I just kept going with the book Fluent Python, which is amazing. I’m enjoying studying that. I also uploaded on the blog some new notes about Python taken from the YouTube channel by Jake Callahan. He’s amazing in explaining basic and intermediate Python concepts. My plan is to keep going with this book and tutorials on Python because I want to fill in my gaps in basic and intermediate aspects with this programming language. For advanced topics like Threading, Multiprocessing, Metaclasses, etc. I am now really worried because they’re not my priorities.

I want to make some general but important considerations. Since it's important to me, I prefer write a [specific article in the "Blog" section](Blog/2024-10-21.%20Making%20plans%20is%20hard.md).